---
layout: post
title: "Skiing"
date: 2026-02-21 14:00:00
description: "How I once gone skiing, great results."
categories: weekly-blog
---

Dear everyone,

it is Sunday again, and you know what that means? But wait Michal, you have not written any blogs the last two weeks! Yes, that is true, but let me defent myself a bit, cause times are changing. I have to say I let myself slip a bit, cause on Friday the 6th of February I have had (what might just as well be) the last exam of my life! And what an exam it was :) The Deep Learning exam of this year has taken us all on a trip to the unbelieable and the unreal, by giving us content which is absolutely NOT representing in the material. I have been sitting there for 2 hours, absolutely STUNNED by the exercises. The mental terror was real, however, nothing is in the end as bad as it seems, and the examiners shifted the grades up to save our poor souls. This damage will always be remembered, and I guess this serves as a reminder NOT TO come back to academic institutions for a while...

Which is what I will be doing for the upcoming half a year. Before I get to what I will be doing, I want to note that I have taken a break to go skiing with my friends through our study association. We spend a week in Morgins in the French-speaking Swiss Wallis. I would like to thank a lot to the organizers for an amazing trip! They have been preparing food for us and organizing everything! It was amazing, nice to feel like this once in a while, not making vacation time any more stressful than it already is :) Either way, I came back broken and sick from the trip, and I am still recovering. This annoys me so much, cause it feels like the one time I actually took vacation everything went wrong :( I am often incentivized by people around me that I should be "having more fun" and that should learn to enjoy life more. Hey, I have tried, didn't work. Have to keep trying, I guess.

Anyway, part of why I am so pissed about this is that I came back sick which made me miss first day of my internship at [Tufalabs](https://tufalabs.ai/). This is what I was super excited about for the last few months. I have always dreamed of doing cool AI research, and now I have finally an opportunity to do it. Well, starting sick was not optimal, but I hope to catch up and work even harder in the upcoming months to make the most out of this opportunity. My internship there will be running for the whole semester, till mid august. During this, I hope to stay on top of everything in and around ARC AGI v3, an interesting benchmark for machine intelligence. We will see afterwards where this will lead me.

Anyways, a lot happening, but somehow also not much (as per me not having energy to execute anything), I hope to come back on my feet fully soon and report to you all my findings!

Best wishes to everybody, I love you all!

Michal Tesnar
